Alone.
Welcome back to the course on Peiffer programming.
Today we're going to learn how to subset doorframes friends and pandas foreign Python just because we're
using the pandas packaged in Python.
All right.
This is going to be a long tutorial is going to have three parts and we'll get to that in a second.
So buckle up.
All right.
How do we look at our data sets right the start of their stars head.
And again we're going to be using the head function a lot because we're going to be visualizing our
data set like that quite a bit and we don't want we want to save space basically.
All right.
So three parts three parts buckle up.
So three parts we're going to talk about how to subset by the rows.
Then we're going to see how to subset columns and we're going to see how to combine the two.
All right.
So let's get started.
Part One.
ROSE.
All right.
We're going to talk about the rose.
Good news.
We've already talked about slicing we know what slicing is.
We've talked about slicing for lists we've talked about slicing for matrices and we can use slicing
for doorframes.
All right.
So how do we do that.
We say stats.
And then in square brackets you specify the rows that you want to slice.
Now you will notice that there is kind of a discrimination between rows and columns.
And we will see just now why so 21:26 is the rows that we want to extract.
Twenty one to twenty five.
So 21 starting from 21 going to 25 remember starts from zero and the whole data from scratch from zero
and whatever you specify here will be from there so if it's there it's 26 it'll be like that and not
including the last one just as we have slicing in lists or in matrices.
Now how did Python know that we wanted to take that rows and not the column.
Maybe in this case there's just more rows.
There's not 21 columns but if I say two to five or two to four.
Right.
So how did Python know that.
I just want the second and the third row and not the second.
So 0 1 2 not in second and the third is how did Python know that I don't want these columns.
I didn't know that I want these rows right in the matrices we had we had that coal mine we would specify
that four rows.
And if we wanted columns which specify a colon here and we specify this for columns.
Right.
But how does Python know in this case that we're talking exactly about rows.
Well the discrimination comes from the way these objects or doorframe of these structures are used in
most cases the way you use them is you have the names of the columns at the top and then you have the
dotted going down so every row is a new entry of data.
It's a normal convention that everybody or most people use tables and doorframes and data sets that
way.
So it is already biased in that sense and therefore is discrimination just comes naturally.
You are more likely to slice to need to slice your daughter frame by Rose than by Combes is sometimes
you need two extracts and columns from a doorframe.
And we'll get to that.
We'll learn how to do that.
But more often than not you will be slicing or extracting subsets of your data set by rows.
So if I want rows 100 to 110 I can just type it in there like that very quickly and I get those specific
rows.
So that is why there's that discrimination towards Rose.
And as you can see this is very similar to matrices.
Let's try another one.
Let's try a different approach and say we want stats and we just want everything and stats that will
be exactly the same as just printing out the whole table including that dot dot dot in the middle.
Also you get the number of columns at the end number of rows and columns.
What else we can do we can say stat's 185 for example 2 to the end.
So we don't specify second thing are there as you can see it starts at 185 goes to the very end.
And as you guessed we can also say stats starts to 10 we'll get the first 10.
So this is exactly the same as saying stats had 10 because that will give us exactly the top 10 as well
.
All right.
So that's how we get these.
All right let's do a quick exercise.
This is going to be a quick exercise is going to be a refresher now that we've discussed that.
It's exactly the same as slicing and matrices.
The exercise is to reverse the doorframe.
So your goal is to print out the whole doorframe but in reverse order so Zimbabwe should be at the top
then Zambia and so on.
So the first and last throws should be come first and Sonna should get flipped.
How will you do that.
This video give us the go see if you remember what we learned in the previous section if you can recall
it right away.
Once you resume the video in three to one I'm going to show you how I would do it.
I would say stat's square brackets and say to call on so start with not start at the very beginning
then go to there.
So this means start the beginning go to the very end and this column is the step so here is minus one
essence you put a minus.
Python understands start at the very end go to the very beginning with a step of minus one or on that
you'll see.
There we go.
It has been reversed.
Very simple so the slicing principles are very powerful when it comes to doorframes allow you to adjust
adapt change modify your doorframes very quickly on the fly and to suit the analysis that you're looking
at.
And by the way what happened is we just output this data from like that.
We didn't actually modify it.
So if I say stats here you will see that it's it's actually printed in the correct order.
And if you want to change it then you would need to assign.
You would need to say stats equals this.
So you're creating a new data from here and then you would assign it to the old ones who basically override
it.
We're not going to do that.
All right so what we're up to now let's say here's another exercise.
Right.
So we've done one exercise it's just another one very quickly because these are quite fun.
I could just keep doing them all day long.
So let's say instead of reverse gets only every 20th country or row that's all right.
So three to one pause the video and otherwise I'm going to show you how I would do it.
Stats.
Square brackets start and nothing and then do a step of 20.
There we go 0 20 40 60 80 180.
Right.
So that's how we do it.
Beautiful.
OK so that's how we work refroze.
Now we're going to move on to part two for today are two columns.
Let's get on with it.
So how do we bring up the calls we say stats columns.
We get the columns.
And how do we extract one call so I have stats on head.
That is our data frame how to extract one column from here.
How do I say for instance I just want the country name.
I just want to extract this column from the data set.
I don't want the rest of it I just want wanted the list of the country names.
How do I get it.
So very simple.
You do stats and then in square brackets.
Remember for slicing we used numbers he said one to 10 or something like that that would give us the
rose.
But if you use the names of the columns then Python will automatically know that you are talking about
the column.
So it's a country name you copied in here.
You run that and you get the country name as you can see what we got is the output of these country
names.
Very powerful again.
And also we can use the head function here as well so we can say stat's country name and we will say
had you run that you'd get the top five.
Same principle.
What else would you want to do.
What if we want to extract two columns.
What if we want to extract this column and this call right so we want to actually get a dot frame that
will contain these two.
You'll notice that this isn't presented as a data frame because it only has one column similar concept
to our kind of but this is it only has one column so therefore why would I think presented to you as
a daughter for maybe you want to use it for other purposes whereas here if we say to say country name
and then we say Khama birth rate.
All right we can copy that or just run it here.
OK I admit I made a mistake.
That's why the error must be another mistake somewhere here.
Oh that's right I forgot the list.
OK.
Let's get of it backlist.
Let's keep this as head.
Now what I wanted to show you is what if we want to.
Right so if we say I want this one and I want birth rate so I want these to let's put them in a list
.
There they are in a list.
If I run that I have a list of these two room these square brackets mean a list is going to keep the
head because it just makes things simpler.
So instead of this I can pasada a list of columns.
So that is where the second square bracket comes in.
Right so I'm going to run this and that's why we have the square record that's that's what Python is
expecting.
Now it does look a bit more intimidating with the square brackets right in our you would have you'd
be passing a vector.
So basically you'd say C and here would fall at the square brackets you would be parsing something like
that you would have a vector you would be parsing a vector and therefore it wouldn't look as bad.
It would look something like this.
You would right away see that this is a vector.
OK.
And then it's been passed.
So that square brackets.
But in this case the square brackets can be a bit intimidating when you see them you might think.
What is this is this looks like a like a matrix or like a two dimensional array or something like that
.
But in reality it's nothing special.
This is just the list that we're passing.
And then this these square brackets belong to the stats object.
So that is how we get this output.
All right.
And not that you can specify the columns in any order.
So let's copy that.
And let's take this call on for example and put it at the beginning give me a second.
There you go.
You'll see they do follow the order that you specify.
But the point is that you don't have to specify them in the order that they come in the data set you
can choose your own order in which you want to specify.
All right.
And then we're going to learn a really cool trick or actually it's a very cool convention.
I call it quick access.
That's not the official name.
Not that it requires the name to be one word and you will see what I mean just now so I'd say that's
dot head top rose again.
And what we're going to do now is we're going to say stats.
So how do we access for instance birth rates right so we were you know we can say start square brackets
birth rate right around that.
I'll get that birth rate.
And that's that.
But it's the same thing you can do similar thing in our But in our you have something like the dollar
operator you can say that's a dollar sign birth rate and that will give you the birth rate.
Call them right away.
It's just a quick way a quick access way to get to that call them sort of the square brackets and then
the quotation marks are on this year.
I get an error.
That's right.
Because Python.
You need to put a dot instead of the dollar sign get the same results you get quick access to that column
and now you can see why we actually specify We changed the names of the columns because we wanted this
space to go away so that we could use it as one word if it was like this then Python would see this
as one object that we were calling and then this as a separate and that would be a problem.
So that's why we wanted it to be together.
That's why we can rename columns and that's why we engaged in that.
And here we can also say head.
Same principle.
We can get that now as you can imagine it would be a much harder to do this and take this approach for
two columns so if you want to call them you still go in two or two more is the going need to take this
approach.
But if you're just looking for one column.
Quick Access stats or the name of your daughter from DOT name and call them and that's it you're there
.
Beautiful.
Very good.
So I hope you're keeping up.
I know this is going to be quick but in reality we're not doing anything complicated.
These are all pretty straightforward things especially now that we've already talked about matrices
we know about slicing and matrices so the slicing part was just basically a refresher.
The columns.
They are very straightforward.
Square brackets and column name it's good that Python can understand you whether you want the rows the
columns just so you don't have to specify that call my every time and say exactly what you're doing
like this python Python is a smart language like that.
And part three combining the two.
So how can we combine them.
Well let's have a look we can say stat's is going to be interesting.
Let's say Slye said by four to eight.
And at the same time we're going to take country name and birthrights.
We've done that.
This could be this it will just copy the list crunching in birthrate and we'll put it in here.
All right.
So I'm going to run this and we'll talk about it then.
So it's sliced out the fourth fifth sixth seventh in terms of Rose and it's taken the columns country
name and birthdate true subset a really great subset of our doorframe.
So what's so cool about this and how does it work.
Well what we can see here it might be confusing like why does this come first why does this come second
.
Reality doesn't matter which we're ordered.
So let me just copy that and put it here and I'll take this and I'll put it there.
And you might think How is this hour.
It looks like magic but in reality it's not.
So what we're doing here so I might just comment that out so this line is not in play.
Let's put on a new line.
So if I just that's four to eight you get this matrix right or this doorframe.
It's taken only the fourth to the seventh row inclusive.
And now this new object this object is also a door frame writes I could even put it into DMF one like
that.
If I do that and now I apply the D to the one I apply the column selection you'll see that I get that
.
So basically what we're doing is we're doing two subsets.
Let me get rid of this quickly.
We're doing subset number one by the rows and then on top of that number one we're applying subset number
to by cards.
Here we're doing the opposite thing.
So let me look at that.
So here we're getting the two columns that we need country named birthrate.
So as you can see all the rows are being extracted.
We've got the dot dot dot somewhere here.
There it is.
All of the rows are being extracted.
So this is this could be due to a doorframe.
And then on top of that doorframe we're going to apply another subset.
We're going to slice out the rows that we want to see around that.
You'll see that we get the same result because this is being applied to the new waterfront.
So again I'm going to remove this and put it back here.
We're on the line.
So in both cases we're actually doing two subsets.
It looks like one subset is happening.
But in reality it's two and that's why python can so easily understand it just applies them step by
step it looks at.
OK.
Once these columns great because the names are here I can tell those are columns.
And here I can see numbers.
So those that's probably slicing rows and that's what returns.
So there we go.
That is how we do subsets in Python.
As we talked about slicing by rows and we learned that it is or subsetting by rows that is very similar
it's the same thing as slicing we can use coal on operate or even a double call want to get fantastic
very quick results.
And then we learned about extracting arose.
So subsetting by row by columns we learned that we can just use the names of the columns and we also
talked about a quick approach the quick grab approach.
There it is.
You can use that approach if just for one column and if its name doesn't have any spaces.
And finally we learn how to combine the two which is a very simple process it's actually effectively
two subset one after the other.
So hopefully that was fun.
Hopefully you enjoy this.
tutorial definitely play around with that.
This is all simple stuff but at the same time it is worth practicing so set yourself some challenges
tried to extract certain rows and certain columns and perform at least one two or three quick exercises
on your own.
Just to let this knowledge sink in.
And we'll continue in the next tutorial.
Until then be coding